# JumpIn

This gem is under improvement, please don't use it for production yet.

V.0.0.2 is not stable.

You're more than welcome to bring up issues!

JumpIn provides a set of methods that make building login & logout functionality really simple, with only few steps. It takes care of setting cookies or session and has it's own tokenator. Moreover, it allows to choose authentication strategy which fits your application the best.

## Links:
- [Source Code](https://github.com/KatarzynaT-B/jump_in)


## Installation
```
gem 'jump_in'
```
Don't forget to run: `$ bundle install`.

In order to use JumpIn you need to include `JumpIn::Authentication` module in `application_controller.rb`:
```
class ApplicationController < ActionController::Base
  include JumpIn::Authentication
end
```

## Configuration
Default `JumpIn` configuration is:
- `permanent`: `false`,
- `expires`: `20.years`,
- `expiration_time`: `2.hours`.

You can modify it by running the generator:
```
$ rails generate jump_in:install_generator
```
which will create `config/initializers/jump_in.rb` for you. You can set custom values there (more explanation below).
/Whenever we mention 'configuration' further in the text, we asume you have `config/initializers/jump_in.rb` file in your app, generated by the `rails generate...` command./


## Authentication
This module provides complex `jump_in` method, two basic methods: `login` and `jump_out`, two helper methods: `current_user` and `logged_in?`, as well as extracted methods to be used according to your own preferences.

At the top of the controller you need to specify on-login(persistence) module(s) you want your controller to have acces to. Specify it with `jumpin_use` method.
It can be `jumpin_use persistence: [:session]` as well as `jumpin_use persistence: [:cookies]` or `jumpin_use persistence: [:session, :cookies]`.

If you create a custom on-login/on-logout/get-current-user functionality, you also add it here, `persistence: [:cookies, :your_module_name]`, e.g. `persistence: [:cookies, :mailing_module]`.
```
YourController < ActionController::Base
  ...
  jumpin_use persistence: [:session]
  ...
end
```

Methods:
```
jump_in(user:, **auth_params)
```
authenticates object and loggs it in (using `login` method). The authentication strategy is chosen based on the passed params.
The method returns `true` if user was successfully logged in, `false` otherwise. Suggested usage is:
```
# SessionController
def create
  @student = Student.find(...)
  if @student && jump_in(user: @student, password: params[:password])
    redirect_to ...
  else
    render :new
  end
end
```
```
login(user:)
```
depends on configuration set in `config/initializers/jump_in.rb`:
- it sets `session` for the given user (object) if `permanent` is set to `false` (default value),
- it sets `cookies.signed` if `permanent` is set to `true`. Suggested expiration time is 20 years (same as `cookies.permanent`). You can modify the expiration time in `config/initializers/jump_in.rb`.

If you're not using the comprehensive method `jump_in`, it is suggested to use `login` method as follows: `login(user: @student) unless logged_in?`
```
jump_out
```
logs user out (it clears session or cookies depending on the previous choice of login strategy). It takes no arguments.

* `current_user` - returns object that is currently logged in (`nil` otherwise),
* `logged_in?` - returns `true` if any object is logged in, `false` otherwise,
* `authenticate_by_strategy(user:, auth_params:)` - returns result of strategy's authentication method, returns `false` if strategy is not detected. All params needed for authentication must be passed as `auth_params` hash, e.g. `authenticate_by_strategy(user: @student, auth_params: { password: 'password'} )`,

### On-login Modules
Calling the `jumpin_use persistence: [...]` method you define which on-login modules your controller has access to.
The chosen module(s) should be consistent with `JumpIn configuration` (default configuration is consistent with `jumpin_use persistence: [:session]`).

You can use one or many modules at the same time. Their methods will be called in `jump_in`, `login`, `jump_out` methods. `current_user` will return the result of the first successful method (or `nil`).

#### Session
Contains the following methods:
- `set_user_session(user:)` - sets user's `class` & `id` in `session`;
- `remove_user_session` - deletes user's `class` & `id` from `session`;
- `current_user_from_session` - returns current user based on `session`, `nil` otherwise.

#### Cookies
Contains the following methods:
- `set_user_cookies(user:)` - sets user's `class` & `id` in `cookies.signed`;
- `remove_user_cookies` - deletes user's `class` & `id` from `cookies.signed`;
- `current_user_from_cookies` - returns current user based on `cookies.signed`, `nil` otherwise.

#### Custom
If you want to add a custom on-login/on-logout/find-current-user method, you should place it inside `JumpIn::Authentication::Persistence::YourModuleName` module and add proper callbacks in `self.included(klass)` method, e.g.:
```
module JumpIn
  module Authentication
    module Persistence
      module YourModuleName
        def self.included(klass)
          klass.jumpin_callback :on_login,         :your_on_login_method_name
          klass.jumpin_callback :on_logout,        :your_on_logout_method_name
          klass.jumpin_callback :get_current_user, :your_get_current_user_method_name

          APP_MAIN_CONTROLLER.class_eval do
            def your_get_current_user_method_name
              ...
            end
          end
        end

        def your_on_login_method_name
          ...
        end

        def your_on_logout_method_name
          ...
        end
      end
    end
  end
end
```
`on_login`, `on_logout` and `get_current_user` are used by the gem and are not to be changed.
Don't forget to specify the custom module in your app's controller (`jumpin_use persistence: [:you_module_name]`).

### Authentication Strategies
At the moment JumpIn provides two strategies: `ByPassword`, `ByToken`. Strategy `ByOmniAuth` is in progress, strategy `ByToken` is in our minds, other strategies are more then welcome to come from your suggestions!


#### Authentication by password
By default we suggest using `has_secure_password`'s authenticate method. In order to do that you need to add column `password_digest` to your model's tabel and add: `has_secure_password` in the model to be authenticated:
```
class YourController < ApplicationController
  jumpin_use persistance: [...], strategies: [:by_password]
end
```
```
class YourClassName < ActiveRecord::Base
  has_secure_password
end
```
TIP: You can define your own `authenticate` method using any `password`-like column from your model. It is important for the method to return `true` or `false`, e.g.:
```
class YourClassName < ActiveRecord::Base
  def authenticate(received_password)
    your_password_attribute == received_password # e.g.
  end
end
```

This strategy is being used when auth_params passed to `jump_in` or `authenticate_by_strategy` include `:password`, therefore you should use it this way:
```
jump_in(user: @student, password: 'secretpassword')
```
What you need to pass is the object and password received in `params`.

If you doesn't need the `jump_in` method and want to use `autenticate_by_strategy` method directly, you should pass the password inside the hash: `auth_params`:
```
authenticate_by_strategy(user: @student, auth_params: { password: 'secretpassword' })
```


#### Authentication by token
```
class YourController < ApplicationController
  jumpin_use persistance: [...], strategies: [:by_token]
end
```
This strategy is being used when auth_params passed to `jump_in` or `authenticate_by_strategy` equal `:token`, therefore you should use it this way:
```
jump_in(user: @student, token: 'secret_token')
```
What you need to pass is the object and `token`. It can be token received in `params` or token that you've decoded.

If you only want to use the autentication method you should pass the token inside the hash: `auth_params`:
```
authenticate_by_strategy(user: @student, auth_params: { token: 'secret_token' })
```


#### Authentication by OmniAuth
In order to log in with OmniAuth authentication you have to find (or create) the object by means of OmniAuth and then simply use `login` method as descirbed above. For example:
```
@student = Student.from_omniauth(request.env['omniauth.auth'])
if @student
  login(user: @student)
else
  ...
end
```

#### Custom strategies
`JumpIn` provides possibility to add your own custom authentication strategy. In order to do that you need to:

1. add custom `def authenticate(keyword_argument(s):)` method to the model to be authenticated.
It must use keyword arguments. The set of the arguments should be unique in comparison to sets of arguments of the other existing strategies (list below);
1. add new module `JumpIn::Strategies::YourCustomStrategyName` and define:
  - `self.included(klass)` - `klass.jumpin_callback :get_authenticated_user, :your_method_name` will ensure your method is called durign the authentication process;
  - `your_method_name` - that indicates params unique for your strategy here: `[:your_params_for_authentication]` and authenticates user in next line.
```
module JumpIn::Strategies::YourCustomStrategyName
  def self.included(klass)
    klass.jumpin_callback :get_authenticated_user, :your_method_name
  end

  def your_method_name(user:, auth_params:)
    return nil unless auth_params.keys == [:your_params_for_authentication]
    user.authenticate(...) ? user : nil
  end
end
```
List of the arguments taken by the existing default strategies:
- `ByPassword`: [:password],
- `ByToken`: [:token].


#### Combined strategies
It is also possible (and very simple) to use many authentication strategies in the same time, by means of our `get_authenticated_user` method.
You just need to indicate strategies fo your interest in `jumpin_use` method and call `get_authenticated_use` once per each strategy, for example:

```
YourController < ApplicationController
  jumpin_use persistence: [...], strategies: [:by_password, :by_token, :custom]

  def create
    @student = Student.find(name: params[:name])
    if !logged_in? &&
          get_authenticated_user(user: @student, auth_hash: { password: params[:password] }) &&
          get_authenticated_user(user: @student, auth_hash: { token: params[:token] }) &&
          get_authenticated_user(user: @student, auth_hash: { custom_data: params[:custom_data] })
      login(user: @student)
    else
      false
    end
    ...
  end
end

## Password Reset

! It is under our consideration to remove this module `from JumpIn` in order to make it an authentication-focused gem.
```
include JumpIn::PasswordReset
```
This functionality requires two columns in your model's table: `password_digest` and `jumpin_reset_token`. With these attributes your application is ready to use the following methods:
* `set_password_reset_for`
* `set_token`
* `generate_unique_token_for`
* `token_uniq?`
* `password_reset_valid?`
* `update_password_for`
* `token_correct?`

Of course you won't have to use all of them by yourself. Everything depends on your preferences.
There are two main and comprehensive methods that cover most of the work: `set_password_reset_for` and `update_password_for`. The rest are just methods extracted in order to let you build your own, custom functionality.
```
set_password_reset_for(user:, token: nil)
```
takes one required argument: an object that the password reset is performed for, passed as a named parameter `user` (for example: `set_password_reset_for(user: @student)`) and sets a unique token as the object's attribute `jumpin_reset_token`. The token is generated by `JumpIn::Tokenator` described below.

If the optional parameter is passed (`token`, e.g. `set_password_reset_for(user: @user, token: your_token)`) the method checks uniqueness of the given token and sets it as the object's `jumpin_reset_token`. It returns `false` if the given token is not unique.

The subsidiary methods are:
* `set_token(user:, token: nil)` - updates object's attribute `jumpin_reset_token` to the given token (although it does not check it's uniqueness) or token generated by Tokenator (if no token passed),
* `generate_unique_token_for(user:)` - generates unique token by means of `JumpIn::Tokenator`, the token is unique in scope of the passed object's class,
* `token_uniq?(user:, token:)` - checks uniqueness of the given token in scope of the passed object's class.

```
password_reset_valid?(password_reset_token:)
```
checkes wheather the given token is still valid (has not expired). Returns `true` or `false`. Default expiration time is 2 hours. You can change this value in `config/initializers/jump_in.rb`. This method is suitable for token generated with `JumpIn::Tokenator`.
```
update_password_for(user:, password:, password_confirmation:, password_reset_token:)
```
verifies correctness of the given token (it's identity with the object's `jumpin_reset_token`) and updates object's `password_digest`. Returns `false` if the token is incorrect.

Suggested usage is: (unless expiration time for tokens is not what you need)
```
if password_reset_valid?(password_reset_token: token)
  update_password_for(user: user, password: password, password_confirmation: password_confirmation, password_reset_token: token)
else
  ...
end
```
And the subsidiary method:
* `token_correct?(user_token:, received_token:)` - verifies identity if the object's token and the received token, e.g. `token_correct?(user_token: @student.jumpin_reset_token, received_token: params[:token]`.


## Tokenator
```
include JumpIn::Tokenator
```
As mentioned above, this module is included by default with the password reset functionality. Thus in most cases there is no need to include it explicitly. However, in case your application doesn't use the password reset functionality but it needs the tokenator somewhere else, you're free to include this module seperately.
`JumpIn::Tokenator` provides two methods that you might need: `generate_token` and `decode_time`.
* `generate_token` generates safe token by means of `Base64` & `SecureRandom`. It contains encrypted token generation time.
* `decode_time(token)` decodes the token generation time from the token. It takes single parameter (that is the `token`) and returns a `datetime` object. It can be used to verify wheather the token is still valid (has not expired).
